There is nothing like experience. We can debate all day whether machines reason, have emergent characteristics, or come up with novel ideas — but at the heart of it, they don't have experiences. Without experience, the best they can do is simulation.
It is very informative then, to create a simple environment where a machine can have an experience. First, it forces you to commit to what an experience is, exactly. Second, you soon realize that an experience requires the sensing of it, an interpretation, and a selected reaction. If a tree falls on a rock, the rock didn't experience anything.
So imagine a line-making machine. All it can do is move forward and turn. This could be a living thing, but let's not over complicating things. All that exists in this world is a blank space, and a line that moves left or right. The only 'experience' here is perhaps whatever it feels when it moves, but let's imagine it feels nothing. There is nothing to sense it this world, so there is nothing to interpret, and nothing to react to. At this point, it wouldn't even be able to tell if it was moving in spite of leaving a trailing line.
Next, we can add some obstacles to the environment. This doesn't add any capabilities to the line machine, it tries to move forward, but it can't when it hits something. It can still turn though, and eventually will get around the obstacles. This creates the potential to interpret and decide. Before, there were no external things to interpret, and now there are. With enough capability, it could even start to map out the world. The key here, is there are new capabilities, but no 'emergent' properties. The obstacles exist in this world with or without it, it's only learning about them. The line machine isn't creating new information, or leaving the world more complex than it found it.
Now look at the line intersecting itself. This isn't terribly different than hitting an obstacle, but for one gigantically important thing. It is experiencing an artifact of itself existing in the world. It needs to interpret something that wouldn't have otherwise existed. A thing that is NOT built up of primitives from the world it found. If you pause and think here, this means intelligence can't just be layers of scaffolding built up from the smallest bits of reality. Intelligence needs to be constantly scanning for new patterns of information that *did not exist* in the previous world-level, in any form.
You can imagine this line creating enclosures, angles, density changes, repeating patterns, textures and many other 'concepts'. But in the world without line-machines, there is no possible concept of path density or ‘bumpy roads’. 
And in the other direction, there is no concept of these textured paths creating a letter that represents a sound.
Or these sounds describing a line drawing of an old man's house in the woods.
As you add more line machines, you could imagine them clustering and mutating into even more complex machines, that in turn make the world even more complex to interpret. And so it would go, rising to higher and higher levels of self-created complexity and the intelligence that shapes it. You could imagine this, or just look outside and see it.
The takeaway is, intelligence is not limited to understanding an environment by building up from some useful base primitives. It is constantly scanning for new emergent patterns in an ever changing landscape -- a landscape that intelligence is able to shape and reinterpret on it’s own. 
We are experiencing the world, and the world is experiencing us.
